Mayor Emanuel Announces Expansion of Predictive Crime Strategy to Ogden
CPD’s predictive crime fighting strategy supports officers in District 10
Mayor's Press Office    312.744.3334
Download this Press Release
Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel and Chicago Police Department (CPD) Superintendent Eddie Johnson today announced the completion of CPD’s new predictive technology and analytical tools in the Ogden Police District (10th District), continuing the expansion of the policing strategy to more parts of the west side.

"With this investment, the hard work of officers on the street is being backed up by new technology and analytics to prevent crime before it happens and respond faster when it does," said Mayor Emanuel. "It is part of a comprehensive public safety strategy including more police, neighborhood growth, after school programs, summer jobs, Safe Passage routes and mentors.”

The new Strategic Decisions Support Center, housed inside the district station, makes district intelligence the driver of the district crime fight by using new technology and tools to help police get ahead of crime and prevent violence from happening in the first place. The 10th District includes the neighborhoods of North Lawndale, South Lawndale and parts of the Lower West Side.

"I am excited to launch predictive technology in the Ogden District which builds upon significant gun violence reductions this year city-wide, as well as in the districts that are already utilizing these tools," said CPD Superintendent Eddie Johnson. "This expansion is part of CPD's commitment to a crime strategy that has made us smarter in our deployments, faster in our response times, and more proactive in our community engagement."

The predictive policing strategy has shown early positive signs in installed districts. In districts where nerve centers have been implemented, shootings are down 23 percent and homicides are down 17 percent, exceeding the citywide downward trend.

As part of the Mayor’s proposed budget investments in public safety, the Police Department will expand the implementation of this technology to more districts and builds upon CPD’s 2017 crime strategy of targeted, data driven enforcement to build a culture of accountability among violent offenders. With this budget, the predictive technology will be expanded to six more districts covering neighborhoods from Chicago Lawn to Pullman, Roseland to South Shore, and Hyde Park to Belmont Cragin.

Since being operationalized in the 7th (Englewood) and 11th (Harrison) districts in January, those communities saw a nearly 60% and 40% reduction in the number of shooting incidents in February 2017 compared to the same period in 2016, respectively. In February, CPD expanded this approach to the 9th (Deering) police districts as well. In July, CPD expanded to the 6th (Gresham) and 15th (Austin) districts.

Today’s announcement includes the following technologies:

Strategic Decision Support Centers
Strategic Decision Support Centers (SDSC), which will be installed in the 10th police districts, are hyper-local intelligence centers that supports the predictive deployment of officers. Using integrated, geographic-specific, real-time analytics such as crime data, POD video surveillance, and gunshot detection, SDSCs allow district commanders to activate a district-specific, predicative policing strategy based on CPD’s more nimble and nuanced approach.

The new SDSC places all this information it into a single, usable platform that will ensure district command staff and officers are prepared with the information necessary to plan their patrol deployment or respond to a call. The new centers will each be staffed with a District Intelligence Officer who can coordinate the information directly with patrol units in the field, as well as a civilian University of Chicago data analyst who will work to ensure the software is being utilized and that data is being collected effectively.

Mobile Technology
CPD will also issue mobile phones to every beat officer who responds to a service call in the 10th districts. These devices will give officers real-time access to district intelligence information to police officers in the field. This mobile technology will allow for smarter, data driven patrols and significantly decreased response times to potential service calls.

POD Crime Cameras Expansion and ShotSpotter Gunshot Detection
While the Strategic Decision Support Centers and Mobile Technology work to predict and prevent crime, the City will also take steps to help officers better respond to those crimes that do occur. CPD will install the ShotSpotter® gunshot detection system to cover the entire 10th police districts on the city's south and west side, as well as increase the number of POD crime cameras. The POD crime camera footprint will be increased to allow for better integration between the two technologies.