Predictive Policing 
10.27.2015 
SARAH BRAYNE, ALEX ROSENBLAT, and DANAH BOYD 
Introduction1 
Predictive policing refers to the use of analytical techniques by law enforcement to make statistical 
predictions about potential criminal activity.2 Predictive policing can involve either predicting 
events (i.e., forecasting when and where crimes are likely to occur) or people (i.e., individuals likely 
to be victims or perpetrators of crimes). Instead of relying on an officer’s ‘hunch’ about an area, 
“predictive policing uses the power of ‘big data’ to isolate patterns.”3 A 2013 RAND report offers 
a taxonomy of predictive methods, identifying four categories of predictive policing:  - - - - 
Methods for predicting crimes  
Methods for predicting offenders  
Methods for predicting perpetrators’ identities  
Methods for predicting victims4 
This primer offers an overview of what is currently known about predictive policing and 
highlights unanswered questions about the implications of predictive policing.  
Context 
Predictive policing is emblematic of a broader trend towards data-driven decision-making in a 
wide range of fields. Within criminal justice, actuarial methods have long been an important 
component of managing risk.5 In the 1920s, Ernest Burgess of the Chicago School of sociology 
created the first parole prediction instrument, in which he calculated probability estimates of 
reoffending. Although actuarial methods have existed in criminal justice for almost a century, 
predictive analytics have only become systematically incorporated into law enforcement practices 
over the past two decades. 6 
Predictive Policing 
2
Statistically informed policing (also referred to as intelligence-led, or data-driven policing) gained 
traction in the 1990s. Then-New York City transit police officer Jack Maple created a crime 
mapping system that was later adopted by William Bratton, then-Chief of the New York City 
Transit Police and later Chief of the New York City Police Department. CompStat (short for 
computer statistics), as the approach came to be called, is now implemented as a managerial 
practice in police departments across the world to identify crime patterns and hotspots, quantify 
and incentivize police activity, and direct police resources. 
The shift towards predictive policing occurred in the late 2000s. In the face of low crime rates, 
departments were facing pressure to push crime rates even lower. Following the logic that the 
‘low-hanging fruit had already been taken’ (i.e., the easy crimes had already been intercepted or 
prevented), law enforcement needed a means by which to further reduce crime rates. Coupled 
with pressure to allocate resources more efficiently in light of tight budgets, in 2008, Bratton, who 
had moved on to become the Chief of the Los Angeles Police Department, began working with 
federal agencies to assess the viability of a more predictive approach to policing. 
Predictive Policing in Theory 
Predictive policing draws from canonical theories of crime that focus on criminal events, crime
prone locations, and criminal opportunities. The basic underlying assumption of predictive 
policing is that crime is not randomly distributed across people or places. Rather, patterns of 
crime are a “function of environmental factors that create vulnerabilities for victims and spaces at 
certain times.”7 Opportunity theory, for example, suggests that offenders systematically select 
targets that offer high reward with low effort and risk. According to routine activities theory, daily 
activities result in the convergence of the following three elements in time and space: motivated 
offenders (i.e., potential criminals), suitable targets (e.g., electronics in a house), and an absence of 
capable guardians (e.g., residents working outside of the house). Another term used in policing 
discourse is ‘soft targets’ – originally a military term to refer to unarmored or undefended targets, 
it is now used in policing to denote unprotected individuals, objects, or places that may be easily 
victimized for crime. 
The root causes of crime vary. Therefore, it is important to consider the different underlying 
assumptions informing different predictive models. For example, Another participant who had 
been working with criminal justice organizations to increase access to data on traffic stops, found 
that models predicting violent crime sometimes identify people, rather than places, as their 
outcomes. 
DATA & CIVIL RIGHTS: A NEW ERA OF POLICING AND JUSTICE 
datacivilrights.org 
Predictive Policing 
3
Predictive Policing in Practice 
The most common form of predictive policing is location-based prediction, which takes 
retrospective crime data and applies it prospectively to determine deployment.8 For example, 
consider a particular block where houses are broken into frequently at night. Based on near
repeat theory – which suggests once a crime occurs in a particular location, it is more likely to 
happen again in that area – it is logical to infer that houses may continue to be burglarized unless 
there is some sort of police intervention. Data demonstrates that offenders focus on familiar areas. 
The police intervention, in this instance, could simply be deploying an officer to patrol the area to 
prevent future break-ins. Police presence may deter individuals from committing crimes, or may 
displace the crimes to another area (in the process of which some attrition may occur, leading to 
reduced crime). 
Another form of predictive policing is person-based. In such systems, law enforcement may 
predict individuals or groups most likely to be involved in crimes, either as victims or offenders. 
Person-based predictive policing could involve social network analysis or regression models using 
risk factors.9 One of the civil liberties questions that arises is: what are the implications of the 
police modeling risk for individuals who have no criminal record? For example, as the White 
House report on Big Data documents, “In response to an epidemic of gang-related murders, the 
city of Chicago conducted a pilot that shifts the focus of predictive policing from geographical 
factors to identity. By drawing on police and other data and applying social network analysis, the 
Chicago police department assembled a list of roughly 400 individuals identified by certain factors 
as likely to be involved in violent crime. As a result, police have a heightened awareness of 
particular individuals that might reflect factors beyond charges and convictions that are part of 
the public record.”10 
Once individuals are identified as high risk, police interventions could range from patrolling the 
areas where individuals reside to more aggressive interventions – such as talking to identified 
individuals or their family members. 
Whether location or individual based, there are four key stages in the practice of predictive 
policing:11 
DATA & CIVIL RIGHTS: A NEW ERA OF POLICING AND JUSTICE 
datacivilrights.org 
Predictive Policing 
4
In the first stage, data is collected. These data can range from basic crime data (i.e., when and 
where historical crimes occurred), to more complex environmental data such as seasonality, 
neighborhood composition, or risk factors (e.g., vacant lots, parks, ATMs). The second stage 
involves data analysis, which yields predictions about future crime. When deciding what 
predictive method to use, law enforcement needs to consider both the type of crime they want to 
target and their department’s resources. 
The third stage in the predictive cycle is police intervention. Usually police intervention involves 
distributing crime forecasts to commanders who use them to make decisions about where to 
deploy officers in the field. Patrol officers are also sometimes given reports at briefings to inform 
them where to go while on shift. During uncommitted time (i.e., when they are not responding to 
calls for service), patrol officers focus their time and resources to surveilling the people and places 
models suggest are likely to be involved in future crime. It is important to note that the very act of 
predictive policing creates new data as well. For example, police describe how they ‘enter and 
clear predictive boxes,’ and they enter their status in the computer terminal in their car to notify 
dispatch and keep records for future analysis.12 
The fourth stage, target response, highlights that this predictive policing cycle, or, ‘battle rhythm’ 
as some law enforcement officials have called it, grows increasingly complex over time. Law 
enforcement needs to account for individuals’ responses to police intervention. As mentioned 
earlier, the intervention could serve as a deterrent, preventing crime from occurring, or could lead 
to the displacement of crime to a different area. 
Rhetoric 
There is considerable hype in media and policy circles about predictive policing. TIME Magazine 
named predictive policing as one of the 50 best inventions in 2011. With its emphasis on ‘big data’ 
analytics, predictive policing is touted as a means to improve both efficiency and equity. 
In terms of efficiency, advocates of predictive policing say it can more accurately predict future 
crimes than humans can.13 One possible explanation for this is that humans overestimate 
meaningful patterns.14 Traditional crime analysts may possess exaggerated perceptions of crime 
patterns and consequently overreact by directing a disproportionately high amount of police 
resources to an area. Additionally, police departments face resource constraints, so predictive 
policing’s ability to ‘do more with less’ can be appealing from a budgetary perspective. 
Champions of predictive policing argue it can serve as a technical solution to problems of 
discrimination and information sharing. For example, advocates suggest it can reduce problematic 
biases in police practices along lines of race, class, and neighborhood. Moreover, as one FBI 
report explains, instead of relying on officer intuition, predictive policing relies on data, which can 
DATA & CIVIL RIGHTS: A NEW ERA OF POLICING AND JUSTICE 
datacivilrights.org 
Predictive Policing 
5
“standardize information across shifts and experience levels” ultimately “eliminating the concern 
about adequate information sharing.”15 It is important to avoid false binaries such as “intuition
driven” versus “data-driven” policing, because in practice, neither approach exists in isolation 
from the other; each informs the other in consequential ways. 
Just as people are excited about predictive policing, there are anxieties that have bubbled to the 
surface since its implementation. Fears stem from civil rights groups, researchers, the communities 
that are being policed, and law enforcement themselves. Civil rights advocates suggest predictive 
policing will be used to profile and harass people who have not committed any crime, and that it 
can do so under the patina of objectivity. 
Researchers suggest that new analytic techniques may, to a certain extent, reproduce 
conventional police practices, but under the guise of data science. Mirroring debates occurring 
over discriminatory lending,16 some of the variables included in predictive models may simply be 
a proxy for race or other protected categories. 
Individuals in law enforcement argue predictive models should not substitute experience, ‘street 
smarts,’ and officer intuition. It is worth noting that law enforcement is not uniform in their 
opinion of predictive policing. Rather, there are divisions, with some officers viewing it as another 
useful tool in their toolbox, others viewing it as an entrenchment of managerial control, and 
others still viewing it as a subversion of their experiential knowledge.17 
Some (but not all) concerns are driven by misconceptions. The major pervasive misconception is 
the Minority Report myth. Minority Report, a book and subsequent film that depicts a dystopian 
world in which individuals are arrested for crimes “precogs” foresee them committing in the 
future, is relentlessly invoked in discourse around predictive policing. This is a misleading 
characterization of predictive policing that distracts from the important issues at hand relevant to 
having a productive conversation about the promises and perils of predictive policing moving 
forward. Predictive policing is not akin to a crystal ball. It does not foretell the future. Rather, 
when used correctly, it can give police officers probabilistic information about where to go and 
who to police. Much of the time, predictive models serve to confirm police intuitions. However, 
they may also be able to dispel officers’ individual perceptions of crime or crime rates that may be 
inaccurate or outdated. The implications of predictive policing techniques have much more to do 
with the bureaucratic processes that surround the technology than the technology itself. The same 
tools can be used to redress existing inequities or amplify them. 
Actors 
There are a variety of relevant actors involved in predictive policing, including local, state and 
federal governments and agencies, predictive platform designers, vendors, researchers, and 
consultants. 
DATA & CIVIL RIGHTS: A NEW ERA OF POLICING AND JUSTICE 
datacivilrights.org 
Predictive Policing 
6
Most predictive policing pilot projects in local police departments are made possible by injections 
of federal funding. For example, in 2011, the Los Angeles Police Department received a three 
million dollar grant from the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) to conduct a multiyear analysis of 
predictive policing. In 2015, the Miami Police Department received $600,000 to do the same. 
Smaller cities tend to take up predictive tools after pilots are run in larger departments. Some of 
the cities that are currently using predictive policing include: Chicago, IL, Memphis, TX, Los 
Angeles, CA, Santa Cruz, CA, Minneapolis, MN, Palm Beach, FL, Dallas, TX, Vancouver 
(British Columbia, Canada), Charlotte-Mecklenburg, NC, Nashville, TN, Glendale, AZ, East 
Orange, NJ, Baltimore, MD, New York City, NY, Philadelphia, PA, Miami, FL, New Castle, DE, 
Lincoln, NE, and Montevideo, MN. 
One of the biggest predictive policing vendors is PredPol. Researchers Jeff Brantingham and 
George Mohler, currently at the University of California Los Angeles and Santa Clara University, 
respectively, suggested it was possible to predict certain crimes much like it was possible to 
forecast the distribution of earthquake aftershocks. They co-founded PredPol, now headed by 
Larry Samuels. Informed by predictive techniques used in research on counterinsurgency 
operations, PredPol is run on a cloud-based SaaS platform and uses three types of data in its 
proprietary algorithm – place, type, and time of crime. It includes three years of data, weighting 
the more recent data more heavily. The algorithm generates 500 by 500 square foot predictive 
boxes on maps, indicating areas where particular crimes are most likely to occur. PredPol is 
currently used in almost 60 departments, the largest of which are the Los Angeles Police 
Department and the Atlanta Police Department. 
Another software is Hunchlab, designed by the GIS firm Azavea. Robert Cheetham, a former 
crime analyst for Philadelphia Police Department is the President and CEO. Hunchlab’s 
statistical models account for the interaction of social, behavioral and physical risk factors. 
Hunchlab is currently used by the Philadelphia Police Department and the Miami Police 
Department. In 2015, the New York City Police Department announced their plans to begin 
testing Hunchlab software.18 
A key contrast between PredPol and Hunchlab is their analytic strategy. Informed by near-repeat 
theory, PredPol has a parsimonious model, only using historical crime data. Whereas Hunchlab 
also uses near-repeats, it also uses risk-terrain modeling19 which involves a much wider range of 
variables, such as seasonality, collective efficacy (the willingness of individuals to intervene), school 
calendars, and environmental risk factors. An interesting conflict and break in the predictive 
policing narrative is that advocates of PredPol preempt some of the criticism leveled at Hunchlab, 
namely for including too many factors that could be considered discriminatory in their models. 
Individuals at PredPol are careful to emphasize their software does not predict who commits 
crimes, but rather focuses on what types of crimes are predicted to occur where and when. 
DATA & CIVIL RIGHTS: A NEW ERA OF POLICING AND JUSTICE 
datacivilrights.org 
Predictive Policing 
7
So, how is predictive policing different from conventional hot spot policing? There are three main 
differences. First, although preliminary data suggests they actually yield substantively similar 
predictions, hot spot policing uses density maps. In other words, hot spot policing involves simply 
plotting crimes in order to visualize a geographic distribution of crime, and subsequently 
deploying officers to the “hottest areas.” Although the predictive boxes generated by algorithms 
often overlay conventional hot spots, predictive boxes are much smaller than hot spots and 
sometimes generate boxes that do not match up with conventional hot spots. A second important 
difference is that predictive algorithms are highly opaque, a phenomenon referred to as 
“algorithmic secrecy.”20 Simply stated, police officers understand how heat maps are generated, 
but the algorithmic process by which predictive boxes are generated is invisible and difficult to 
interpret. Finally, whereas hotspot policing is retrospective in its analytic approach, predictive 
policing is prospective. Hotspot policing directly maps where crimes occurred in the past, but 
predictive policing could predict crime will occur in a location that there has not been a crime 
before. The exact ways in which this would happen are often shielded by the proprietary nature of 
predictive policing algorithms. 
Understanding the actors and agencies involved in funding and adopting predictive policing 
efforts is helpful as we transition into the next section on open questions about the practice. 
Knowing the institutional architecture of predictive policing is integral to knowing where the 
points of leverage are and understanding where and how research, measurement, and assessment 
can occur. 
Open Civil Rights Questions 
There are a number of open questions that are pertinent to address as predictive policing is 
implemented. These systems have been designed based on research using existing data yet, as 
these systems mature, new data will influence the algorithms in profound ways and policing 
decisions will be driven by the information provided by these algorithms. This raises numerous 
questions about efficacy and societal implications. 
How and where does biased data shape these systems? 
Establishing causal inference (i.e., being able to directly test whether predictive policing causes a 
decrease in crime) is difficult. In terms of research design, assessments of predictive policing 
usually involve longitudinal studies examining crime rates before and after predictive policing. 
Simply because crime goes down after predictive policing is implemented does not necessarily 
mean predictive policing caused the drop in crime. Predictive policing is not randomly distributed 
and other forces – such as broader crime trends, selection bias in terms of which divisions are 
most likely to adopt predictive policing (e.g., they may also be the most likely to have proactive 
DATA & CIVIL RIGHTS: A NEW ERA OF POLICING AND JUSTICE 
datacivilrights.org 
Predictive Policing 
8
officers regardless of whether they use formal predictive methods or not) – may also explain the 
drop in crime. - - - - 
How do decisions by law enforcement affect the validity of the data? What can be done to 
correct biases in the data? 
How does the implementation of predictive policing affect the data that these techniques 
rely on? 
Who can meaningfully assess the algorithms that are being implemented and what kind of 
algorithmic oversight is appropriate? 
How does missing or biased data shape the predictions that these systems make? 
Ongoing assessment of these systems will be critical, but is by no means guaranteed. We need to 
ask what kinds of structures are necessary for evaluating the efficacy of predictive policing. One 
possibility is to run randomized control trials (RCTs) across divisions. Such trials need to be 
evaluated by researchers independent from the department, the designers of the strategy, and the 
vendors. For example, we should not simply rely on assessments of a policing initiative by the 
consulting firm that designed the strategy, which is currently the case in some departments. 
How do different policing tools perform, relative to each other and relative to 
earlier methods? 
Although we know about comparative accuracy of crime prediction in patrol (e.g., we have data 
on the predictive power of algorithms vs. analysts), we do not know how platforms measure up 
against one another (e.g., Hunchlab vs. PredPol). Moreover, even less is known about the 
application of predictive models in investigations. - - - - - - 
Are there more cases cleared by arrest when detectives employ predictive analytics? 
How do law enforcement officers treat the information they receive from each system? 
Do they solve cases faster? 
Are fewer people wrongfully ensnared in criminal justice system? 
Do officers trust the information they provide? 
What bureaucratic dynamics influence how officers incorporate the information they 
receive into their policing practices? 
DATA & CIVIL RIGHTS: A NEW ERA OF POLICING AND JUSTICE 
datacivilrights.org 
Predictive Policing 
9
It is also important to consider not only how efficacious a predictive technique is, but also how 
transparent it is. As mentioned above, algorithms tend to be relatively inscrutable for police 
officers, and research suggests that simple heuristics may be almost as effective as advanced 
computational methods. For example, stop heuristics with simple scoring rules may have 
comparable accuracy to fuller statistical models.21 Models that are easier to understand can 
improve police buy-in and can be less expensive, making it possible for smaller departments with 
fewer financial resources to adopt the approach. 
How can Fourth Amendment protections be preserved in the context of these new 
tools? 
The way law enforcement uses predictive analytics challenges the traditional paradigm of Fourth 
Amendment law because predictive information may be used to justify stops under the existing 
Fourth Amendment precedent.2223 In a 2015 law review article, Ferguson asks whether a stop can 
“be predicted on the aggregation of specific and individualized, but otherwise noncriminal, 
factors.”24 He argues that otherwise noncriminal factors “might create a predictive composite that 
satisfied the reasonable suspicion standard.”25 In other words, predictive analytics may effectively 
make it easier to meet the reasonable suspicion standard in practice, thus justifying more police 
stops. Ferguson suggests that if the police use big data to reach the threshold of reasonable 
suspicion, the courts “should require a higher level of detail and correlation using the insights and 
capabilities of big data.”26 - - - 
In the context of predictive policing, should we raise the standard of reasonable suspicion? 
Should being a high risk individual be grounds for police surveillance (with or without a 
warrant)? 
How will all the new forms of data being generated through predictive policing be used? 
What will be admissible under the exclusionary rule? 
How will predictive policing affect the overall dynamic between police and the 
communities they serve? 
We must also consider questions about the implications of predictive policing in terms of civil 
rights and social inequality. - - - 
To what extent does predictive policing create self-fulfilling statistical prophecies? 
Does it improve or erode police-civilian relations? 
What kind of hit rate (i.e., the percentage of stops in which an officer makes an arrest or 
issues a summons) constitutes defensible public policy? 
DATA & CIVIL RIGHTS: A NEW ERA OF POLICING AND JUSTICE 
datacivilrights.org 
 
Predictive Policing 
 10 
 
 
DATA & CIVIL RIGHTS: A NEW ERA OF POLICING AND JUSTICE datacivilrights.org 
 
 
 
 
 - How can we measure bias in predictive models? 
As Barocas and Selbst argue, discrimination may be an artifact of the data collection and analysis 
process itself. Even with the best intentions, algorithmic decision-making can lead to 
discriminatory practices and outcomes.27 Algorithmic decision procedures can “reproduce 
existing patterns of discrimination, inherit the prejudice of prior decision makers, or simply reflect 
the widespread biases that persist in society. It can even have the perverse result of exacerbating 
existing inequalities by suggesting that historically disadvantaged groups actually deserve less 
favorable treatment.”28 Each of the steps in data analysis can create “possibilities for a final result 
that has a disproportionately adverse impact on protected classes, whether by specifying the 
problem to be solved in ways that affect classes differently, failing to recognize or address 
statistical biases, reproducing past prejudice, or considering an insufficiently rich set of factors.”29 
Simply stated, we need to ask whether predictive policing reduces police discretion (and to what 
extent we want to reduce it in the first place), and whether it serves to exacerbate or remedy 
existing inequalities in police practices. 
Finally, returning to an age-old question in policing literature: to what extent is the crime rate a 
function of enforcement practices? More generally, to what extent is what we “know” about crime 
conditional on how we know it? We need revisit these questions in the context of predictive 
policing, because the ‘raw’ data inputted into predictive models is in fact not ‘raw’ at all, but 
rather fundamentally social. 
Having answers to these types of questions will help us determine to what extent predictive 
policing is defensible public policy, and what the best practices of predictive policing are. It is an 
anachronism to think that the police can (or should) stop using data or predictive models. 
Consequently, we need to design and implement models with these questions in mind. 